===========================================
Libc++ 19.0.0 (In-Progress) Release Notes
===========================================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Written by the `Libc++ Team <https://libcxx.llvm.org>`_

.. warning::

   These are in-progress notes for the upcoming libc++ 18.0.0 release.
   Release notes for previous releases can be found on
   `the Download Page <https://releases.llvm.org/download.html>`_.

Introduction
============

This document contains the release notes for the libc++ C++ Standard Library,
part of the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure, release 18.0.0. Here we describe the
status of libc++ in some detail, including major improvements from the previous
release and new feature work. For the general LLVM release notes, see `the LLVM
documentation <https://llvm.org/docs/ReleaseNotes.html>`_. All LLVM releases may
be downloaded from the `LLVM releases web site <https://llvm.org/releases/>`_.

For more information about libc++, please see the `Libc++ Web Site
<https://libcxx.llvm.org>`_ or the `LLVM Web Site <https://llvm.org>`_.

Note that if you are reading this file from a Git checkout or the
main Libc++ web page, this document applies to the *next* release, not
the current one. To see the release notes for a specific release, please
see the `releases page <https://llvm.org/releases/>`_.

What's New in Libc++ 18.0.0?
==============================

Implemented Papers
------------------


Improvements and New Features
-----------------------------

- The internal structure ``__compressed_pair`` has been replaced with ``[[no_unique_address]]``, resulting in reduced
  compile times and smaller debug information as well as better code gen if optimizations are disabled.

Deprecations and Removals
-------------------------


Upcoming Deprecations and Removals
----------------------------------

LLVM 19
~~~~~~~

- The ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS`` CMake variable that was used to enable the safe mode will be deprecated and setting
  it will trigger an error; use the ``LIBCXX_HARDENING_MODE`` variable with the value ``extensive`` instead. Similarly,
  the ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS`` macro will be deprecated (setting it to ``1`` still enables the extensive mode the
  LLVM 19 release while also issuing a deprecation warning). See :ref:`the hardening documentation
  <using-hardening-modes>` for more details.

- The base template for ``std::char_traits`` has been marked as deprecated and will be removed in LLVM 19. If you
  are using ``std::char_traits`` with types other than ``char``, ``wchar_t``, ``char8_t``, ``char16_t``, ``char32_t``
  or a custom character type for which you specialized ``std::char_traits``, your code will stop working when we
  remove the base template. The Standard does not mandate that a base template is provided, and such a base template
  is bound to be incorrect for some types, which could currently cause unexpected behavior while going undetected.
  Note that the ``_LIBCPP_CHAR_TRAITS_REMOVE_BASE_SPECIALIZATION`` macro can be defined in LLVM 18 to eagerly remove
  the specialization and prepare code bases for the unconditional removal in LLVM 19.

- The ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_NARROWING_CONVERSIONS_IN_VARIANT`` macro that changed the behavior for narrowing conversions
  in ``std::variant`` will be removed in LLVM 19.

- The ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_CXX20_REMOVED_ALLOCATOR_MEMBERS`` macro has been deprecated in LLVM 18 and will be removed
  entirely in LLVM 19.

- The ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_CXX17_REMOVED_FEATURES`` and
  ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_CXX20_REMOVED_FEATURES`` macros have been deprecated
  in LLVM 18 and will be removed entirely in LLVM 19.

LLVM 20
~~~~~~~

- The ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS`` CMake variable and the ``_LIBCPP_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS`` macro that were used to enable
  the safe mode will be removed.


ABI Affecting Changes
---------------------

- The internal structure ``__compressed_pair`` has been replaced with ``[[no_unique_address]]``. This change results in
  empty final types to be placed at the beginning of the object instead of where the beginning of the
  ``__compressed_pair`` subobject was. This is only observable by checking the address of the subobject.

Build System Changes
--------------------
